---
title: "Organizing for Change"
date: 2025-12-09
---
As we all know, we are living in times of multiple crises. As if one crisis was not already enough, right? This adds to the mental load, which is already high due to the fast-moving world and high expectations in the business world as well as in the private sphere. While we know things are bad in many ways and something needs to change, we are often held back by our own doubts and worries about whether such massive things can even change. However, we often overlook the positive transformational change that occurs around us, because it is drowned in a constant flood of attention-seeking media. Often it might be small things, but one should not forget that many great achievements start with a small step and that it takes many steps accumulating over the long run to create big transformational changes. This shows us that things are not set in stone. Some changes might even be inevitable, but still we need to remember that the power to influence them lies within us. So, how do we facilitate it?

One of the ways to tackle local and societal challenges is by organizing. Specifically, this means making people aware of a common problem they have in their community and giving them the tools they need to come up with solutions and successfully implement them. It may be a dangerous street or air pollution in their area, where they want to improve the situation. In the past, this has been a successful strategy for transformational change. A well-known example is the civil rights movement during the 50s and 60s, where African American people managed to end segregation through effective mass mobilization.

Organizing works by finding out what people already care about, as long as these are not hateful agendas trying to oppress minorities, and helping them work together. To make this happen, a community organizer normally goes into the community and asks around about the issues at hand. In the process, they sense who the community leaders are—not the official political ones, but those who really have influence in the area. Of course, they also get a feeling for what irritates the people in their local neighbourhood. With that information, they will usually try to set up meetings so people can discuss which challenge can realistically be tackled and how to solve it. During that process, they get support with knowledge, networking, and using their common resources so they are able to fulfil their goal. Most of the time, this will result in several actions to inform and mobilize people and might result in a meeting with political or corporate leaders where they are confronted with an ultimatum. As the circumstances differ from case to case, the solutions can look different. Anyway, it is important to note that it is actually the community who solves the struggle at hand, while the organizer only supports the group in their endeavour.

To sum it up, organizing might be a viable strategy to solve local issues in your surroundings, which in turn can contribute to solving the big crises we are facing. The process can be an empowering experience, where a lot can be learned and new fulfilling relationships might grow. How about joining a local initiative like the JKU Sustainability Call or one of the many groups who are working towards progressive change? Maybe this is your chance to step up and be the change you want to see in the world.
